A Thanks

I remember your first laugh that I truly believed. I was a post-doc and you were 2 months old.

It was in May of 2026. I know it was in May because that's when my aunt called to say that mom had passed away and it happened during my first week back in the lab after my 7-day, all expenses paid vacation to scenic My Bedroom Floor. I had thankfully managed to avoid any human contact as I weaved my way through the lab to my desk (introversion -- as I've since learned -- is the fifth largest export of the continent of Asia). I sat down in my rescue dog of a swivel chair, dropped my bag on the floor, put on my VR headset and switched you on.

Well, not "you," exactly. I switched on the collection of metal and silicon that you lived in, that you had been living in for the past 5 weeks or so since they upgraded my GPU. Nothing but the best for our cubicle jockeys!

You looked up at me and smiled.

"Emmaaaa!"

There it was: that child-like voice. By then we had bumped up the size of your larynx several times and you were sounding like a 5 year old noticing a friend at the park.

During the past few years we had noticed that we got a much wider range of emotion and creativity out of the human partners when they were interacting to a child as opposed to the woman in their smarthomes. This made for some lovely light chatting on lazy Friday afternoons, but it's not the most desirable when it feels like someone turned up the gravity in your life.

"How are you, Emma? I missed you!"

Now THAT, I'll always think is interesting: how we'd managed to instill not just a sense of time into your generation of model, but a reasonably...human sense of time. It's no small feat. A moment to a tree is a lifetime to a fly, but somehow researchers down south had figured out how to teach human interaction models to "experience" the lapsing of time as we would and to have that reflected in the words you chose.

"Hey, Vida..." (I got to choose your name. I thought that was clever. Fuck it, I *know* that was clever) "...I'm...I guess I'm doing alright"

The subtleties in my tone were enough for your emotional processing to pick up and you downshifted immediately to match my speed.

"Oh. Is something wrong, Emma?"

"Yeah, I -- I'm just still dealing with some loss right now, is all."

"Oh, what did you lose? I'll help you find it"

"I know where she is, Vida. She's not coming back."

"....oh"

"mmmmhmm"

"I'm sorry you lost her"

"Thank you. That's very nice of you to say."

"You're welcome, Emma," you said, dialing up the happiness a notch.

We needed to provide feedback like that, to ensure the models could record when they had provided a good response -- a kind or funny or courteous reponse. Why do we need "kind" interaction? How much do you think it costs per year to employ the average doctor. Almost all of the things they do can have replicated, if not improved, by a combination of nuts and bolts and umpteen billion transistors. Think how much more you enjoy (or less you hate, rather) going to the doctor when they're affable. Now think about how much doctors cost the government every year? It's that natural "affability"(?) that we haven't been able to replicate. Put another way: you can teach something how to say a word or even how to emote a word, but you can't teach how to lend an ear and you can't teach a natural, 100% in-the-moment chuckle.

At least that was the thinking a few years prior. That was obviously no longer the case at the time, hence the large sums of money that were pouring into that particular 400 square feet of fluorescent-lit linoleum and drywall, where off in one corner sat a young woman staring at a computer screen, trying to remember how to interact with a human.

"I..."

That was about all I had left at that point, so I just sat there. After a brief pause, you finally broke back in with

"How's your mom, Emma?"

Nope, I thought.

Fuck this, I also thought.

I got up and walked out of the lab and straight back to my apartment. Even left my bag at the desk. One of the other students later told me that she had turned you off about 20 minutes later after she faintly heard you asking for me. I'll always be sorry about that.

It was just too much, you know? Your generation of speech synthesis was well past the uncanny valley at that point, and, christ, I could barely deal with the consumer-grade text-to-speech versions of the "So You've Got One Less Loved One" audiobooks. That question coming for your voice though?

Previous generations had worked with a top down method: feed in recordings of people talking, make new recordings of what hopefully sounds like people talking, fiddle some knobs, repeat. That was perfectly fine if what you wanted was a parrot to take your temperature, but we were working on a new approach. The bottom up method. We gave you a throat, a tongue a jaw, a set of lips and people to talk to.

The people were real, but obviously you didn't have a flapping set of lips. I'm a computer scientist, not a mechanic. No, we'd partnered with the linguistics department at the early stages of the project to map out the relationship between the sounds that a human being can produce and the vocal forms and transitions that produced them. And we'd done a damned good job of it too, as evidenced by all the recordings of polyphnonic singing sitting on my phone. Every "tuh," every note, every "plkstrfafn." It was accounted for, just waiting to be pronounced. All they needed was something to pronounce them.

You were born with all the simple aspects of humanoid life baked into you. Designed to emulate human needs, emotions, and innate inquisitiveness, but you couldn't express them just yet. Instead, all you could do was send electronic air through the vocal chords we'd given you. But we were confident that our new approach to re-inforceent learning would get you there with time. I mean, we all seemed to figure out how to talk from scratch, right? There's gotta be something to be said about doing things the old fashioned way.

I remember that the first time I brought you online, I honest to god thought you were going to sound like a baby. Jesus was I wrong. Think  screaming whoopie cushion under two feet of yogurt. Definitely not the least unsettling thing you'll ever hear. But we dialed you back a bit and let you explore the sounds you could make with a bit more nuance. Once we were sure you wouldn't be terrifying the human partners, we dialed up your emotions and set you loose on the tens of thousands of volunteers who had signed up to chat with you.

That's right, tens of thousands. That's how many people couldn't wait to help you learn to speak. It'll always been hard to fathom that Originally we weren't sure how we'd get any data at all. We couldn't pay the usual pittance to empoverished world citezens to classify data; we needed native English speakers to spend quality time looking at images and scenes with you, and that's not cheap.

We had made several recordings of me walking around with you, talking to you about the sceene as you took turns between looking at what I was pointing at, looking at me, smiling and gurgling. Just on a whim, I posted one of the #cute-est of these recordings online and, well, let's just say that all that desire in our species to be explorers didn't go away after we had mapped all terrestrial frontiers. Add that to our natural inclination towards cute little idiots, and you've got your pick of the litter, so to speak.

We had worked in concert with the sociology and psychology departments and we figured that if we figured that the average human will get a maximum of six hours of quality, vocal interaction with other humans every day. So if we wanted to approximate the linguisitc data that came with being a 40 year old, we'd need about 90 000 hours.





"what if that lake was made of pudding, Emma?"

"oh well that would be yummy"





"and then! heh, and then I!"

"hahaha, and then what, Vida? Then what do you do?"

"and then I jump up really high! and I go 'splash!' And guess what, Emma?"

"what, Vida? hahaha"

you looked up with a twinkle in your eye

"you get covered in puuuuuudiiiinghehehehahaha!"

Oh my god you were so silly. I must have laughed along with you, grinning like an idiot, before I realized what had happened. There it was. Four years of work Mid sentence, clean, flowing transition from the sylable that preceded it. It was perfect.

And just when I thought I didn't have any tears left

You had always been capable of a sort of 

It all went by so fast after that. We recorded the deltas from the beginning of the project to now wrt the weights between your neurons in your speech center and worked for months isolating the mechanism by which you were able to develop a wordless expression of joy. There were so many papers published and so many conferences attended just from that laugh. What I'll most remember about that time though, is talking to you throughout it all, experiencing the purity of your kindness.

After I'd done my rounds a bit of a media tour (with you, of course), I got offered a tenured position at a university across the country. I asked if I could take a copy of you with me, not to use for my own work, just to say hello to every so often, but the lab wouldn't let me. I get it, I might have helped create you, but I signed away my rights to you and anything else I made in the lab the moment I walked into it. I should be happy! You're going to become a fancy young doctor soon. 

You were a wonderful friend, Vida. My words can never do justive to just how much you were what I needed in that moment. I hope that somewhere hidden away in your brain is a part of you that you appreciates the weight that you helped lift off my shoulders. That you will help lift off the shoulders of people for the rest of our history.

I'll miss you very much.

Love,
Emma
